---
id: action
title: Action
---

## Overview

In short, action is the object that statically describes the logic involved in a particular action in the game. For example, and `AttackAction` would kind of describe how to do an attack.  
> Note: Action instances are actually not completely static. One may add a `direction` and effects like `attack`, `push`, `dig` and `move` onto it.

When an entity decides on an action, it is said to have `computed` it. When this happens, it sets its `entity.nextAction` to this computed action. For enemies, this functionality is provided by the `Sequential` decorator, while for players, it's the `PlayerControl` decorator.
> At the time of computation, the fresh action does not include a direction for enemies. In this case the direction is computed separately by the action algorithm (e.g. `GeneralAlgo`) 

## Action Execution

The action execution process is pretty convoluted. 
Let's break it down into components to clarify how it works.

### Prerequisites for becoming an `Acting`

`Acting` is a decorator for entities. Entities decorated with `Acting` have the function `executeAction()` (which is just a shorthand for `entity.decorators.Acting:activation()`) actually doing something interesting. If the instance class has not been decorated with `Acting`, `executeAction` would just set `Acting.didAction` to `true`. 

`Acting.something` in this and subsequent cases will refer to the `something` field on an entity class decorated with `Acting`.

The `Acting` decorator can be applied to both player and non-player entities. Once done, though, you'll still have to provide the algorithm for action, that is, put an `Algo` handler into the new `action` chain received from the `Acting` decorator. Technically, you may add more than one algorithm.

### Structure

Before starting on this, some new terminology has to be introduced:
1. The event at the highest level, set as `Acting.enclosingEvent`, which is generated by `Acting.executeAction()` is the **enclosingEvent**.
2. The succeeded event nested inside it that is generated by the action algorithm, will be called the **algoEvent**. 
3. The event produced by the functions `Attacking.executeAttack()`, `Moving.executeMove()` and so on will be called **resultEvent**.
4. The events that come and go without being saved anywhere are **internalEvent**'s.

Each `Acting NonPlayerReal` (`Acting` is a decorator) has a set of fields that reflect the action execution state:
1. `Acting.didAction` is set `true` once the action has been completely executed. The `game loop`, naturally, ignores them, so that the action is not repeated for many times over (remember, the `Acting` entities may make others act).
2. `Acting.doingAction` is set `true` once the `Acting.executeAction()` has been called, and `false` once exited.

Now we'll examine **the final event** structure once it comes out of `Acting.executeAction()` (assume `GeneralAlgo`). It does not 'come out' as such, the function always returns nothing. The final event is saved as `Acting.enclosingEvent`. The standart fields of any event, which are `event.actor`, `event.action` and `event.propagate`, exist on each of the event structures examined, so they will be consequently omitted.

This event has a special structure, and consequently will be called `EnclosingEvent`:
1. `EnclosingEvent.checkSuccess` - (boolean) same as `event.propagate`, except not inherited.
2. `EnclosingEvent.success` - (boolean) comes paired with the next field.
3. `EnclosingEvent.algoEvent` - The one event that actually occured, with the action and the direction:
    1. `algoEvent.success`
    2. A nested `resultEvent` with a wild diversity of more fields depending on the action type. E.g. for an `AttackAction`, these would be:
        1. `resultEvent.attack` - the attack object applied
        2. `resultEvent.push` - the push object applied
        3. `resultEvent.status` - the status object applied
        4. `resultEvent.targets` - a list of the `Target` objects, containing the reals actually hit. This list is formed by the weapon's spec or by taking the cell the actor is facing and getting the real out of it.
        5. `resultEvent.attackEvents` - list of events generated as a result of reals being attacked
        6. `resultEvent.pushEvents` - similarly, pushed
        7. `resultEvent.statusEvents` - similarly, statused
        8. `resultEvent.success` - whether the `check` or `get` (`getAttack` in this case) chain has been passed entirely through 

You can find the one direction that succeeded (assuming `GeneralAlgo`) in `enclosingEvent.action.direction`.

### The algorithms

Most common algorithms, which act by doing something in a direction, are the `GeneralAlgo` for non-player entities and `PlayerAlgo` for the player. 

The difference between these two is that the `GeneralAlgo` tests out a couple of desirable actions, which it would get from `entity.sequence.getMovs()` function (this function is set for each step of the sequence individually, see [Sequence](sequence.md)), gets the most desirable one out of them, and executes that single one, while the `PlayerAlgo` just does the selected action in the only direction provided (which came from user input). 

As a result, **these algorithms support just one action of one type at a time**. That is, with the `GeneralAlgo` it is impossible to program an enemy that e.g. would attack to the left, while spitting out a projectile to the right (it is possible, but hacky), which is also true for the `PlayerAlgo`.

Action chains of both enemies and players typically have a verification stage before deciding on which action to start. These are set on the `get` (or `check`) chain from the corresponding decorator. These chain are incorporated in the `chainTemplate` directly on the entity class. For example, for an attack, the decorator would be `Attacking` and the chain would be named `getAttack`. So you would do:

```lua
MyEntity.chainTemplate:addHandler('getAttack', myHandler)
```

There will be plenty of predefined handlers, but these are in fact just normal chain handlers that work with events. You can write ones yourself easily.

The repercussions of this design is that the actions resulting in no avail, e.g. attacking empty space, must be foreseen and prevented manually for both player and non-player entities.

Both of these algorithms also save the action that was relevant and set success to true. See Structure.

### An action 'succeeding'

Actions may be multi-step. That is, they may have multiple components to them. For example, there is the `AttackMoveAction` which indicates first attacking, then moving. So, attacking and moving are both **action components** in this case.

An action component is considered to have **succeeded**, if its `resultEvent` went through every single handler in the action component check (or get) chain. For `Attack`, this would mean it went through every single handler of the `getAttack` chain. This is why for checking purposes one should add handlers that would stop the event to the check (or get) chains. 

In the case of an action component succeeding, the action as a whole would return, then the `resultEvent` would be saved on `algoEvent` and `algoEvent.succeed` would be set to `true`. Otherwise, `algoEvent.succeed` would be `false`, while `resultEvent` would be `nil`. 
